Hey Thomas. Hi Michael, thanks for having me here. Yeah, awesome to have you here on
the podcast. Thanks for everyone watching live. Please put your comments out into the
live chat and we'll see if we can make them part of the show. And with that, let's kick
this off. Thomas, welcome to Talk Bithumbary. Yeah, thanks for inviting me, Michael. I'm
looking forward to this conversation here today and spread astronomy and Python a little bit around.
Two things that are so amazing. Obviously, people know that I love Python, but I really love
maybe three angles here. I love astronomy. And I just love how it allows us to just
dream so big, right? And so much of science fiction is about space and interplanetary travel.
And I mean, obviously we're not there, but thinking about space is just so amazing.
And also all of your work on YouTube is really nice.
And we're going to talk a little bit about that.
So super exciting topics that we got lined up here.
Yeah, thank you very much.
Indeed, space is really also one of my passions since I'm a child, right?
So I worked on some stuff, still doing this as a hobby, as a side project,
as a freelancer, and so on.
So I think we have some topics to talk in the next 60 minutes or so.
Yes, we do. So before we get into that, though, let's just set the stage with a little bit of
background for yourself. And what's your story? How did you get into programming Python? And how
do you find yourself doing all these live stream Python space science stuff on YouTube?
Yeah, sure. So as I just said, astronomy is part of my passion since I'm a kid, right?
But it's more about Python. And back in 2009, I started studying physics. And then I did my
bachelor thesis in 2012 at the European Space Agency and North by in the Netherlands. And
they had the task to create some kind of simulation software to determine the detectability of so
called near earth objects. So objects that are, let's say, coming sometimes quite close to Earth,
and you want to observe them, you want to detect them, you have your telescopes,
but you don't want to waste resources, you want to see where do I have to look with what kind of
settings. So this was my very first project and also my very first touching point or contact
point with Python. Afterwards, I did my master thesis in Göttingen, so in the middle of Germany,
where I was also a student at the Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research.
And there I was part for three years, a little bit more than three years on the
field mission, so part of the Rosetta mission, which flew to the comet to remove get a cement
goals. So maybe some of the listeners know this is a mission that we're spending on the comment
and there was part of a small instrument called the dust impact monitor, where we use Python for
data analytics and so on. So if you read a paper about this mission from 2000, I don't know 14 or
so Python is involved, you can believe me that. Afterwards, PhD, I was part of the Cassini mission
of the so-called cosmic dust analyzer. You'll see asteroids, dust, you know, the cosmos is big,
but I was always interested in the small stuff. And there I use Python for numerical simulations
and also machine learning. And this machine learning task is something that I'm still
continuing because since three years I left academia, I joined the automotive industry.
Here in Stuttgart, it's only two candidates and it's one of them is Mercedes-Benz, where I work
as a senior machine learning engineer. But in my free time, I'm still doing this tutorial videos to
share my knowledge I gathered over the last couple of years. And I'm doing also freelance work at the
at the Free University of Berlin,
continuing to develop some machine learning models
for the Cassini mission.
Yeah, so this is my short story.
- What a cool story.
I mean, you got to be on not just one,
but two space missions,
which is really, really fascinating.
- Yeah, so--
- People work on these for a long time, right?
Like I know some of the people,
I think it was Cassini, the people who were on the project when it was getting planned
and then built and then oversaw that was many years, right?
And so did you drop into it while it was kind of already going a little bit?
Or were you there from the start?
That's a very good question.
Of course, this there's always this cliche saying of saying this missions are generation
projects and I just can confirm it.
It's totally right.
Like the proposal for Cassini was I think, a year or so a few years before I was born.
And I'm now 32.
So it is indeed a generation project.
And I had a full head of slack hair when it started, and then I was bald when it landed.
You know, something like that, right?
That's a totally reasonable statement.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, these missions, they take a long time to prepare to build and test and then you
have to fly there and get the data derive conclusions.
And I mean, still now, Cassini is gone since like, I think five years now.
And there's still tons and tons of data that needs to be analyzed.
And the same thing applies also for the Rosetta mission.
Right, right.
Once the either the mission is over, because the spacecraft was destroyed on purpose, like
Cassini was crashed into Saturn, so it wouldn't potentially end up on one of the moons that
that could potentially have life and corrupt it, right?
Which is a pretty,
you have a lot of forethought or foresight there.
Or it just, the mission is over, it returns.
There's still, maybe the work almost just starts then, right?
If you're trying to understand all of this data
and trying to tease out all the things
that might be discovered.
- Yep, so one example, I mean, Cassini,
when it was launched, 1997, I think,
machine learning was not really a big topic, right?
I mean, for example, support vector machines were invited, invented in the 90s.
And then the last couple of years, you had no deep learning and other new methods and
more computation power.
And now you have more and new ways of analyzing data.
And this was that nobody was thinking about this when the mission started, right.
So of course, with new methods on Earth, you can analyze the data from the past.
And this applies for many other missions as well.
So this is amazing times.
So if anybody's interested in astronomy and Python, I mean, you can work with heritage
data.
It's pretty cool.
And a lot of that data is public, right?
I don't know about ESA, but I know that NASA makes basically makes all of their data public.
How about ESA?
Yes, that's right.
So NASA has a very good policy on this.
ESA also, they have also their data.
I'm not 100% sure they have like this.
I think NASA has this PDS planetary data system or so where all the data are public.
But I have to admit, I do not know the exact ESAR policy.
So I knew that our data were public quite fast.
So we publish everything on the PDS system with description and documentation.
But I can only speak for my team and of the others.
I do not know what the general policy is, though.
Yeah, pretty interesting and fortuitous because it's the inputs for a lot of your work.
that at least we're discussing today.
- Absolutely.
- Yeah.
Question from the audience real quick.
Kim out there asks, as a ballpark,
how much data does a mission like Cassini generate?
- That's a good question.
I think there was a poster a few years back,
I think in 2017, and it was, let's say in total,
a large three digit gigabyte number.
So like hundreds of gigabytes.
Of course, one would say, "I don't care.
There's no big data for me."
But you have to think that this is really raw data, binary data.
If you are decompressing the data, it's way, way more.
So for example, I was working on one instrument, the Cosmic Dust Analyzer, and after decompressing
all the data and put them into an SQL database, we had like, I don't know, like 200 gigabytes
of data, right?
Compressed, it was only a fraction of it.
So it's really large number and especially also the images take a lot of space.
The other thing you got to think about is we don't have fiber from us to the spaceships,
right?
It's like a 2600 baud modem.
Not actually, but in terms of the bandwidth all the way out to Saturn, that is not a high
bandwidth connection, right?
Absolutely.
Absolutely. I mean, if I remember correctly, the Rosetta spacecraft had like, I think,
26k, like a 26k modem. So it was before my time when the internet was created, let's say,
and this is, this underlines the importance of having good algorithms to compress the data and
also send the data in a smart way and also to analyze the data already on board, right? So,
So for example, our instrument on Phila, in fact, we would like to have all the signals,
you know, every dimensionality and everything.
But at the end, we were only able to extract certain attributes of the signals to derive
our scientific conclusions.
So yeah, there's always a caveat.
Yeah.
And well, even terrestrially, you know, on the earth, like CERN and Large Hadron Collider,
do a bunch of processing right on those devices. Because even when you have fiber, it's still
completely the amount of raw data blows it away. So it's got to be trimmed down to something
like, okay, well, we'll take 1% of the interesting data and then look at that, which is still
some tremendous number. Final question, final follow up on this, I suppose, before we move
on. I saw some conversations or some write ups about the deep space network. Is that
is called where they where they pass the data around and reworking that to be higher bandwidth.
Do you do anything about this?
Um, I, I did not work on any network topics. But I remember as I saw this huge dishes,
and it's, I really can't say anything about the bandwidth, it depends on the mission, right? If
you have a mission close to the sun, or at moon, you can get megabytes of data within within minutes.
But if you compare it, for example, with the Voyager missions that are really far beyond,
like it takes hours, the radio waves, it takes hours to get there and to come back.
You're talking there about really bytes or bits per second, right? Although you have
additional 80 meters, like for example, Australia or so. Improving this would probably improve the
signal to noise ratio and everything to communicate better with instruments that are far away. Like
Like also new horizons that is also now beyond Pluto.
- Yeah, amazing.
All right, let's make our way over towards
the YouTube side of things.
So I ran across you over on Mastodon
and what an interesting time it is
that like there's a new social network
and people are kind of like finding a new way
to do this thing we've done for a long time.
So I saw your profile, like, okay,
So it says, "Former space scientist, ML engineer,
"creating Python and space and machine learning
"tutorials on YouTube."
I'm like, all right, I gotta go watch these.
And so I ended up on your YouTube channel
thinking just, you know, what a really cool project
that you got going on there.
And I wanted to share that with everyone,
especially the data science folks.
But even if you're just interested in, you know,
a little bit of these data science tools,
or I can see this being really interesting for teachers,
maybe high school and college,
who wants something slightly more interesting
to show their students then,
you know what, we're gonna load up
the New York City taxi cab tipping data once again,
and you're gonna like see that,
there's really a lot of cool possibilities
for things that are both pretty approachable,
not tons of code, but the results are cool,
and it's in this sort of inspiring in the sense
that we talked about with space at the opening.
Now, before we get into this, like specifically, one thing I just want to get your thoughts
on because this is really interesting.
You hear people talk about how social media is really bad and there's filter bubbles and
there's misinformation and absolutely acknowledging all those things are true.
Places like YouTube, they just, for all of their problems and all of their like fail
videos and memes of the day, there's a whole bunch of really, really incredible information.
So for example, I had Dr. Becky on and she's got an incredible YouTube channel over there,
like half a million subscribers.
You know, she does such a good job of being very real about talking about, you know, what
she does and as an astronomer and also sharing, you know, she does stuff where she's like
sharing notebooks on screen and whatnot, but it's still pretty informational.
The other one that I really like is Astrum
with Alex McCaughan.
Just really, if you're just gonna kick back and relax
and watch something inspiring,
this is a fantastic channel that people can check out.
But what caught my attention about your work
is just it's so concrete, right?
It has this sort of inspirational, amazing things,
but then you're like, now let me pull up the Cassini data
and let me throw that into Pandas.
And then there's a bunch of cool tools we'll talk about
used to visualize it. So maybe what are your thoughts on this? Like YouTube as an educational
resource compared to say like discovery channel or history channel or these other places you think
these are great pro documentaries, like actually, these are way crappier than these YouTube channels.
It's amazing. Yeah, I think I think there are a lot of different channels out there for let's say
different levels of knowledge, right? I mean, like what you showed other channels, they would like to
to do something like public outreach.
So they explain science maybe on the basic level.
And it's pretty good and fair, right?
Because you reach more people, you reach a larger audience and make science
more accessible to this people, right?
Um, this applies for a lot of different science, science channels, like
we've also like Vsauce or so who made also science quite popular, you know,
with his funny videos, with his funny beginnings and so on.
And the thing I wanted to do was to introduce, let's say,
this Python character to really work on the data.
And I know that I will never reach the audience like the others,
because the others, let's say, they have a different goal.
They want to make, let's say, popular science, so to speak,
to make it accessible.
Here you have more requirements to understand that they have videos,
like, for example, Python and so on.
So this is more like really for the people who are really into coding and so on.
But I was thinking, and I just checked YouTube, and I was thinking,
"Well, there are coding videos out there,
but this particular small spot, Astronomy and Python,
it was a gap, nobody was filling it."
And I was thinking, "Well, let's try it out and see how the response is."
And I was writing on Reddit, on Twitter, and so on with some people.
And you talked about high school teachers.
Actually, some teachers were writing me and said,
"Hey, Thomas, this is pretty cool.
Can I use your code? And so I said, of course, everything is open source, right?
So yeah, you reach a different audience there.
You do not reach thousands or hundreds of thousands of people,
but people who like to interact with you, talk with you and have ideas and so on.
So this is this is pretty cool. And I like it.
It's it's really amazing.
And also, those people that you reach, many of them
have an amplification effect, right?
Like somebody who watch Astrum probably just really enjoys it.
but somebody watches your video might go do a good college lecture,
make it part of their course or, you know, sort of spread it further.
So really, really, really cool.
So what we're going to do is we're going to go through a couple of your videos
and highlight some of the ideas.
I don't know how long is your...
You've got a playlist which I'll link to called Space Science with Python.
It says how many videos.
Do you know how long it is? About, roughly?
Oh, good question. I have no over 60 videos.
So this is like the main playlist.
I have also a new earth objects and also machine learning.
So I think in total, I would say each video is like between 10 to 25 minutes.
The so in total, it's a few hours, let's say, if you're more familiar with
Python, you can also let's say, take only a look at the Jupyter notebooks.
Um, so yeah, it really depends, where you would like to start and just small
disclaimer, my very first videos, the audio quality is not so good and I'm
I'm really talking like a robot.
So yeah, it was kind of difficult for me in the beginning, but now it's way easier, let's
say.
I can tell you the ones that I watched further down, perhaps, are really good, really nicely
done and I can definitely recommend them.
And as somebody who has gone on this journey of creating stuff public, if I go back and
listen to episode one, two or three of my show, there's a bunch of great stuff there.
I'm just like, it's still a little bit of a cringe-worthy
type of thing, right?
So you're like, oh my gosh, listen to the audio
and that echo, where's that echo?
Who didn't notice this echo, you know?
All right, so let's, before we dive into this,
there's a couple of tools and libraries and stuff
that I came across that were really,
some were new to me and some were really, really powerful.
So you have all of your code, as you said, on GitHub,
and we'll link to that.
Maybe the first one, maybe it was its name,
or you just used it a lot on some of the first videos that I watched.
SpicyPie. I mean, what a cool name.
So what is this? Tell us about SpicyPie.
Yeah, so SpicyPie is based on a toolkit from NASA.
So NASA introduced Spice, I would say, decades ago, right?
It's a toolkit based on C, Fortran, I think also Java.
And Spice is like, let's say, the tool to compute trajectories.
So the movement, the path of planets of spacecraft and so on, but not only the
movement, also, for example, the orientation of a spacecraft, where is my camera looking
on Mars?
Where, how is my instrument oriented with respect to Saturn and stuff like this?
So basically every geometric question you would like to question, you can answer this
with Spice.
There was one caveat, though. There is no native support for Python.
And there's one, I think he's still a PhD student, Andrew Enix,
and he was thinking, "Well, I write, I make a wrapper
for the C library for Python."
So he is doing this, and it's like an unofficial library of Spice,
which we call now SpicyPie, but it includes everything,
really everything. And it's a little bit also kind of science.
It's not easy to approach this toolkit,
because if you look at the official NASA documentation,
it's sometimes, by all due respect, please,
it sometimes looks a little bit older, let's say,
you know, like an older HTML site.
I mean, the advantages will remain for the next decades as well, right?
No fancy front end stuff.
I put it in the Wayback Machine, and it looks the same.
Something like that, right?
And yeah, and I try and spicy pie is something I use also my videos and try to help others or
my viewers to approach this tool to compute trajectories, the positions of planets and so on,
because you can do all these things with spice and spicy pie is the perfect wrapper for it.
Yeah, it looks really, really easy to use. And that's the kind of thing that just,
it seems really unapproachable without a little bit of help. On this day, at this second,
how is Jupyter oriented over to Earth? And if this comet is coming through at this angle,
what's the distance between? Those kinds of questions, over time, seem really tricky to
answer. And it's those kinds of things you can do with SpicyPy, right?
Exactly, yes. There's one small caveat though, you have to know so-called kernels. So huge database
with a lot of files where all the information is stored. But again, I also put it into my videos
and there is some documentation on this. The learning curve is quite steep, but very,
let's say, humbling in the beginning. I can imagine. Let's see. Yeah, so in a lot of your
GitHub, you'll have these kernelmeta.txt and what is this here? It's just a picture. And in here,
it's got a link back to these particular files that have all the information that
SpicyPy needs, right? So it's not completely standalone. You've got to provide it these
files to work from, right? Exactly. So I put these kernels that I use for my tutorials also
also in the GitHub repository. And for example, these three kernels is like,
the second one you see this 0012.tls,
it's something that contains time information.
So you may know every four years you have a leap day,
you have to add in your calendar, right?
But there's only half the truth.
There are also so-called leap seconds and leap milliseconds and what's not.
And yeah, these crucial information are stored in these files,
for example, and you need to load them to convert time.
Well, you know, we don't care that much about a leap second here and there on earth.
But if you're traveling for 10 years at 30,000 miles an hour, 50,000 kilometers an hour,
off by one second might mean you don't make it to the right place, right?
Exactly.
I mean, with SPICE, you also compute the orientation, for example, of your dishes to the spacecraft
and pointing is very, very crucial.
I mean, light speed is not instant, right?
also takes some time. So you have to be really careful and really precise with your scientific
work and alignment. I suppose you do. I was thinking of spaceships, but I wasn't thinking
of flight. But you're right. Another question for the audience, are those kernels effectively
enormous tables of data about where Jupyter will be at a given time and stuff like that?
And they are basically, yeah, in a way they are, but they are also, yeah, they are different
kernels with different precision.
So for example, for the solar system, you have very precise kernels that cover a year,
for example, and you have maybe less precise kernels that cover 50,000 years or so.
So there are like really, really different kernels that cover different time ranges with
different precisions.
But you're basically right. And let's say the art is to create your own kernels
with your own methods and so on.
This is something I did not cover yet, but we will get to this in the future.
Okay, more videos to come.
All right, so we spoke about Spicy Pie. Excellent.
Another one you want to give a shout out to was AstroML.
AstroML was my first contact point with machine learning, actually.
So they have this package called AstroML.
And it's also, if you scroll down a little bit,
then you will see also a book, which is called,
it's a very long title, Data Mining.
Oh yeah, there, Statistics Data Mining,
Machine Learning and Astronomy.
And it's a book that covers space or astronomy,
Python and machine learning.
And this is like, I like this book.
I mean, I'm not getting paid for the advertisement or so.
I really read through it.
I went through the tutorials and saw on the tutorial,
some, the notebooks are for free.
And this is an extreme good resource
to also get in touch with machine learning,
Python and astronomy, and it covers a lot of topics.
So if you have nothing to do for Christmas time,
just take the book a few hours per day and go through it.
- Yeah, okay, fantastic.
And what kind of questions do you answer with AstroML?
Like when would you use it?
So AstroML has, yeah, for example, they have a lot of examples of star data and also extra
galactical data.
So for example, spectra, so-called spectra of galaxies, like a galaxy has a certain color.
So the color is like in physics, it's like a spectrum, different wavelengths, or also
active galaxies and so on.
And then with AstroML, you can, for example, identify clusters.
You can classify the galaxies into different categories.
For example, you have also the galaxy scattered
all over the sky.
They're using, for example, clustering algorithms
to identify certain structures in the night sky.
So we have like huge so-called groups or so of galaxies.
And of course you can make your own empirical models,
or you can also, for example,
use unsupervised machine learning methods
to identify these huge clusters of galaxies.
And these are like one or two examples
they cover with this book.
- Cool.
Yeah, you can understand things like
based on the general color of the galaxy,
it might be a different age because the stars are older
and the older stars burn in a different light
than like a bright new, you know, blue star, right?
- Correct, yes.
- Yeah, excellent.
And then one thing, I don't think I pulled it up
And it's is it vis-vis with a Z or vis-vis with an S?
- It's with an S.
- Let's see how well.
- Yeah, and.
- You gotta be careful when you search live for things.
Yeah, here we go.
- (laughs) On the top, yes.
- Oh yeah, it's all good.
- Perfect.
- So you'll see this make an appearance as well.
And you tell us about vis-vis because it's not,
as you pointed out, it's not particularly popular
in terms of use.
It's got like right now, 198 stars.
But wow, it looks really incredible for exploring data.
Tell us about this.
- I'm still wondering why it only has 200 stars.
So let's say, let's go into the history.
Let's push it.
So maybe a little bit of history, why I found this.
What I liked at the beginning or retrospectively,
what I liked when I started using Python,
I had no ideas about libraries, right?
I was completely unbiased.
What is NumPy?
What is pandas?
I don't care.
I don't know.
So I was really searching in an unbiased way for a visualization tool for 3D rendering.
And I found this VisVis.
At this point, it had like 30 stars or so.
And I was like, "Ah, this looks really nice to make some animations of videos, for example,
of asteroids."
And I was also writing a little bit with the author and saying, "Hey, I would like to,
I have some questions.
Can you help me?"
He helped me also because I was a beginner.
And over the years, I've always used it for my animations.
Also on my YouTube channel, you'll find two videos of the Rosetta spacecraft, like a trajectory
and so on.
No fancy animation, just simple and easy.
And you can also use it, for example, to read in shape data of, for example, comets or asteroids,
really like the 3D things, and then render them in OpenGL, play around and have a feeling.
How does a comet look like?
And this package supports it out of the box.
I'm extremely impressed and I'm also, let's say,
negatively impressed that it's still 200 stars.
So shout out to Alma Klein and his VisVis package.
This is something that I use now since the beginning,
since 10 years now.
- Yeah, it's what I saw you doing
that was really, really cool.
You will maybe see this in one of the videos,
but you create a, take a 3D shape of the comet,
a very high resolution one,
lots of polygons, render that in a way that you can rotate and zoom in and explore it.
And then on top of that, you say, well, let's plot the path of the Phileas lander that landed
on it that you worked on and how it moved around in this like 3D space. And you can
rotate it and look at the elevation. Yeah, in Python, we have such a treasure, so many choices
of visualization libraries.
I think that partly might be having some to do with it
because it's just like, well, there's these 400 things
to choose from to visualize my data, where do I start?
So maybe people stick more to the most common ones.
- Exactly, I mean, Matplotlib, I mean, it's super fair,
right, also for scientific plotting and so on,
but especially 3D rendering and so on,
it's quite rare to find something impressive,
easy to use and something that has good performance, right?
- Right, and is interactive, yeah.
- Absolutely. - All right.
Let's start with this first video.
I asked you to pull out a couple of videos
that you thought were interesting.
And the first one is the asteroid flyby.
So maybe tell us a bit about this particular video,
what you were trying to demonstrate.
And I'll pull up maybe this JPL small body database
and look at the source code a little bit too.
- Yeah, sure.
So some of you of the viewers or listeners
may have some science feeds, right?
Like you have some news, like for example, I don't know,
killer asteroid is flying towards earth
or something like that.
And then you read the article and it's reported-
- People had to run, it created this giant tsunami
in Gulf of New York, yeah.
Exactly. And then you read the article and it's put it into perspective.
Ah, it's not dangerous at all.
And it's like X, Y, Z kilometers or miles passes by.
And well, you cannot really grasp this as a reader, right?
What is 50 million kilometers? Is it a lot? Is it not a lot?
You know, you don't get really a feeling.
And I was thinking, well, let's take a particular example like this one here.
2021 WP. What a nice name.
And let's see how many miles or kilometers it has a flyby.
And this applies not only for this object, it applies for several other objects.
And if you know how to compute these things,
if you know your, for example, matplotlib routines and so on,
then you get a maybe better feeling and understanding
that sometimes a close flyby, let's say, it's not that close.
So you know that, for example, it has like, I don't know,
certain distance, and then you convert it, for example, to a factor of, of the distance
between moon and earth.
And then it says, yeah, it's the distance 100 times between earth and moon.
And you think like, well, in my world, that's not a close flyby.
Of course, astronomical scale it is, but it's not comparable to a flyby of let's say 2000
kilometers, right?
So this helps a little bit to understand the data to understand what's going on there.
And then also to visualize it and see, okay, what does it mean close flyby, right?
So I think that's quite helpful to understand that.
I think it is.
And one of the things you did here a lot was you said, okay, well, let's, let's look at
this.
And when you get the answers, you would say, well, we're gonna not necessarily talk about
it in miles, but you would divide it by one.
LD was that distance to the moon?
- Yes, a lunar distance, for example.
- Yeah, lunar distance.
- So we have like two metrics here,
the lunar distance and the so-called sphere of influence.
That's something else.
It's a larger sphere, virtual sphere.
- Yeah, so if people wanna go through this one,
this one, I would say,
really takes advantage of SpicyPie, right?
You do a couple of things.
You say, "We're gonna load up all the data
about this asteroid.
We're gonna load up the data about the Earth
the moon and the sun and try to put all these things together using spicy pie, right?
Yeah, exactly. So most or some people who know a little bit about physics here,
they say, well, you need always this multi body simulation, you need to know the gravitational
influence of the sun, the moon of Mars and Earth and so on. But sometimes and this is
also something I show here. You can reduce it to a simple two body problem.
You just assume that the earth has a certain gravitational influence up to a
certain range, and afterwards you can neglect the influence. And then you see,
check if the asteroid is, for example, passing or crossing the so-called
sphere of influence. I think for earth is like, I don't want to lie, 600,000
miles, respectively, a million kilometers or so. something like that.
three or four. Yeah, something like this. Yeah. 2.4 or something. Yeah, it's even written there,
right? Yeah. And this is, and then you switch, for example, between different coordinate systems
and you ignore the sun and then you only consider the earth and so on. And of course, it's not as
precise as an embodied simulation, but it helps to understand what is the influence of each,
each individual body in the solar system. Yeah. So another thing you did on this one is you went
through and said, let's figure out when this 2021 WP asteroid enters the Earth's sphere of influence
and see how much it will be affected. How much will its trajectory be altered through there?
Yes, so there are also books of astrodynamical theories where you can
use some equations and yeah, for example, yeah, predict the changes a little bit.
But here with this example, with this particular example, you get really a
feeling and understanding how is the orbit altered, right?
And of course, if it's closer to the earth, it's more severe than outside.
Also the dwell time.
So how long is the object in the sphere of influence with what kind of
velocity inclination angle and so on.
So it's a very multidimensional problem.
It's not trivial.
You really have to have a feeling, understanding and
simulate this a little bit.
And then you see how earth affects its cosmic vicinity,
especially the smaller objects
like the small asteroids and comets.
- And just for people listening
and not seeing this at the moment,
the code that you wrote to figure out
when will the thing enter the sphere of influence,
given it starts way back when it was detected or whatever,
It's only like 11 or 12 lines of code.
It's not super complicated stuff.
Putting together things like Panda and SpicyPy
and some simple Python,
and that includes two lines of reporting,
I suppose, as well, doesn't it?
So it's pretty approachable, I think.
It's not obvious at first,
because SpicyPy has weird functions you gotta call,
but once you know, like, this is the one I need,
then it's not hard at all.
- Exactly, right?
I mean, this is how everybody of us started programming
in a way, right? We made maybe some overkill functions
and for loops and what's or not, right?
And after time, you get a better feeling and understanding.
And of course, even this code, you could probably improve even more,
but I try to find a balance between, let's say,
yeah, length of the code and also, yeah,
if the reader can comprehend it or not, right?
I mean, I could put everything in one line, nobody would understand it,
and I could say, "Well, it looks elegant."
but I try to make it explainable.
- Yeah, there's definitely a balance of like,
just don't use things too fancy, just make it approachable.
I think along these lines, there's a question from Martin.
It says, "Is there a primer to understanding trajectories
"of New York objects?
"It's great to have the data, but you might be limited
"in what you can do if you're not a subject matter expert."
I think this video actually is not a bad start,
but what would you say?
- That's a very good question.
I'm currently doing a small series on this new Earth object
topic because, yeah, the orbital elements,
you have to understand orbital elements,
what are orbital elements.
You can generate a lot of insights in there.
But this is what I try to approach a little bit
and help, right, with all the small videos.
I think you see here, yeah, new Earth objects.
It's still not finished.
Yeah, you've got a whole playlist on 12 videos, right?
Yeah, I think a new one will follow the next couple of days.
And the thing is, so the person who asked the question is totally right.
You have to have some kind of understanding of this, of this, of this
concepts.
I try also to make some concept videos you see on the right hand side.
It's not related to Python at all.
And I have to apologize.
I'm not like a, I don't have a million subscribers.
I'm have, don't have the animation skills to do this things.
You're like, like good animations or so.
I really try to make it like a lecture in the university to make it as
understandable, approachable as possible.
Um, but yeah, you have to dive also into the physics sometimes to
really understand what's going on.
But the good thing about especially asteroids and so on, you, the
learning curve is also very steep.
You get really easily into this topic.
So just read one hour book about orbital elements or two
hours and you can start.
Yeah.
And you've got a whole YouTube channel full of recommendations there.
Awesome.
Okay.
So I guess to wrap this one up, you went through and you, there's a bunch of elements, orderable
element properties in the JPL database that like the eccentricity and the Perry, remind
me what Perry is.
Yeah, I can explain maybe one, two values.
So to demystify these numbers, right?
I mean, these numbers are really complex.
But for example, the eccentricity, you can say this value is between zero and one.
Zero means it's a perfect circle and very close to and the more it goes to one, it's
more and more elliptic.
It's more and more like shaped like an egg.
And if it's larger than one, then it will just make one run revolution around the sun
and then it goes au revoir into the outer space.
A Q for example, is the closest distance this object will have with the sun.
And 0.93 means it's 93% of the distance between earth and sun.
So this is like really just a just just just a value.
It's like very, very close to 140 million kilometers or 80 million miles.
And the inclination is also another value.
Let's say this is the last one.
We have the earth.
Now imagine you have a table, you know, the table.
So for the listeners, you have a table, you put a small ball in the center, that's your
sun. And now you have a second ball rolling around the sun, that's the earth. And the plane,
yeah, the table is your so-called ecliptic plane, but not every object is moving on this plane.
Now you have sometimes objects that are a little bit inclined, maybe by a few degrees or even 80
or 90 degrees. This inclination is actually called inclination I, and here it's for example,
3.8 degrees. So these are the three elements you know now and it's quite, let's say, quite easy to
understand on the meta level. Yeah, yeah, for sure. So when you do all of your math, you come back
and say, well, let me check this back against these numbers. How close are we, you know, how
close do we get to predicting what JPL said it was, right? So that's kind of a cool way to check.
Yeah, I mean, there's like JPL has a data, they've also the minor planet center has some data. So
they always deviate a little bit, right? If you let's say, plus minus 1%, or so or 0.1%,
you can reach this with very simple Python, Python scripts. And I think that's quite fair
results, right? I mean, you don't have the ambition to write a high, highly scientific
paper. It's at the end, it's you can live with this. And you have to be careful. So you have
like tons of numbers here. And it suggests the precision that's not really existing, right?
Because the precision is limited by the uncertainty. So the uncertainty is like really the cap.
And that's it. One final thing I suppose to talk about before we move off this video is
you talk about describing where this is an asteroid, right? Not a comet, or no,
this was a commoner asteroid, which one is it? Actually, I don't know. It could be it could be
be one of these things. It's nobody written if it's an asteroid or comet. So most likely
it's an asteroid, but you don't know.
Yeah, okay. So it comes shooting by and you talk about, okay, well, let's use the solar
coordinates to talk about it. And then when it gets close enough, like gets into the sphere
of influence, you go, let's switch it over to the Earth-oriented, where Earth is at the
the zero zero point coordinates and we can as it's close to us, we can talk about it
relative to us and then it shoots back out like switch it back to the solar. Maybe talk
real quickly about like how you think about that.
Yeah, those you already explained it pretty well. I mean, this is how you can compute
the change of orbits of asteroids without some heavy and body simulation, you just switch
between coordinate systems with different centers. And Michael, you explained it perfectly.
It is the way how you described it.
So it's a very, let's say, simple approach,
but you can implement it quickly
and it's really nice to see the results.
- And it's great to think of as a human,
like how far is it from earth and what direction is it?
Talking about from the sun,
when you're trying to see how it relates to you,
it makes less sense.
In the math to do, it's pretty easy.
You just subtract, you know,
do vector subtraction or addition for pandas rays, right?
>> Absolutely, yeah, you're right.
It's basically it, yeah.
>> Cool.
Okay, next one here.
A comet in 3D.
And this is where you talk, where you show viz viz.
Let's talk about this comet.
This is why I was confused whether it's a comet or asteroid.
Or actually, yeah, it's a comet.
>> It's a comet, yes.
>> Yeah, good.
Okay, got it.
Got it right.
So tell us about this thing.
Tell us about this thing, this 67P, what is this?
- So this was the main,
or this was the scientific objective or goal
of the Rosetta Thiele mission by ESA, right?
So ESA was sending the probe several years ago,
I think it was 2004, I think.
And it started to a 10 year journey to this comet.
And this comet is a so-called periodic comet.
So it revolves around our sun
And the maximum distance from the sun is somewhere around Jupyter.
Yeah.
So it's not like the heli comet, for example, that comes back every 90 or a
hundred years, it's like a regular visitor, but a very small one.
And he's, I was thinking, well, it's a perfect goal.
Let's go there and see how this thing, how this thing looks like.
And so they were sending the Rosetta spacecraft there.
And, this became closer and closer in 2014 until the Rosetta spacecraft
reached its final orbit, was deploying the lander, everybody was happy.
But in the meantime, the spacecraft made more and more and more images of this comet from
different angles.
So like a huge stereoscopic camera, you make, you can derive 3D information.
And this 3D information is then going through some algorithms I'm not familiar with.
And then at the end, you get this shape model, as you said, in the beginning of the podcast,
this polygon shape.
And this polygon shape is free data, it's freely accessible,
and I just downloaded it, and yeah, you do some data crunching,
and then I used VisVis to visualize it.
And then you can see really the different structures,
how this two-ball shape looks like.
Some people describe it as a rubber duck
with a small head and a larger body.
And you will also see in this 3D that there is like a night sight
that's always in the night, so you don't know how it looks like.
It's very, the 3D model is very smooth because you don't have any information there.
So it's pretty impressive to see how this model has been derived with data from,
yeah, millions of miles away.
And now you can really reconstruct the comet on your small laptop.
Yeah, the one that you reconstructed with Python looks not, not the level of detail
of maybe some of the very highest resolution pictures here,
but it looks pretty believable
that those are the same things, which is quite amazing.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- Now, you said this was small.
- Of course, the images are way better.
- Yeah, yeah, of course.
You said it's small, and it is small,
but it's approximately four kilometers square,
or 2.5 kilometers square,
which is not, it's not just a little pebble in space. It's a
kind of a thing, right? It's, it's somewhat big.
Yeah, it's, let's say, if this object would hit or fly towards
Earth, we would have a problem, let's say, right?
Really wouldn't make a movie about that one. Yeah.
Oh, yeah, that's a, I don't know, some some heroes can go
there and and crush crush the comet. But if you, for example,
But if you compare, for example, Shuril of Gerasimenko with other comets, like the Halley
comet, it's a, it's a, let's say it has larger cousins out there, which are also brighter
and you see them also in the night sky when they have, they pass by.
And this comet, you really do not see in the night sky from earth.
So this is what I'd say, I would say is small because I cannot really see it with the naked
eye.
It's still small in terms of planets and stuff,
but it's not entirely small compared to say, I don't know.
>> Yeah.
>> If it were to hit us, we would notice.
Let me pull up a little bit of this picture.
The first thing I think is interesting in this video,
which is Space Science with Python Part 22, Comet in 3D.
You said a lot of stuff you're doing directly
in Visual Studio Code using the notebook format,
which is pretty interesting.
This one you switched over to Jupyter
and you started using Qt, right?
Qt, PyQt, which to bring up this interactive window,
which you create a little window and show it
and pair that with VisVis, which maybe,
and where's that fit into your world?
Like a lot of people I think kind of just stick
with notebooks and output, whatever they can get
into the interactive widget inside the notebook.
- Yeah, so I really like VS Code, right?
I mean, one of the main features I use,
especially also at work,
is something called remote containers.
So you have a Docker container
with your entire working environment,
and you can share it with people on Windows, Mac,
Linux, really doesn't matter, right?
This is pretty, it's game changer, right?
But with PyQt, I was somehow not able to create this interactive widget
out of the Docker container.
So I was really playing around and trying these things out,
but at the end I was saying, "You know what?
It's fine. Let's use a simple virtual environment.
Let's keep it running on the native JupyterLab environment,
and it's fine."
So this is where I was saying,
"I cannot do everything."
This was really my nemesis.
- I don't think I'd be able to get that going either.
So you pull this thing up and it,
you know, initially it doesn't have any shading or anything,
but it looks quite like what you would expect there.
I'll let me, and eventually get it going
with like shadows and light sources.
It's a pretty cool achievement.
And this is all that VisVis library, right?
Exactly. Yes. So this was is doing is it is doing it? Yeah. And it also was part of our
science paper you see now here. So for the podcast listeners, there's a paper at astronomy
and astrophysics. And it was about the landing of the of the instrument also with our best
instrument. And yeah, the analysis you see here also here figure four was done with matplotlib.
So Python and space is not only like filling YouTube videos and making tutorials. It's really
used in science. So I know also a lot of other people using Python now and you see it every day.
How cool. Same tools we all have, right? All right. Let's see. This is,
I think that's the same one. Then the next video, you know, this one, I could tell this really was
a personal, like this meant a lot to you when you put it out into the world. The filet is
landing because this is what one of the projects you were directly involved in, right?
Yes, exactly. So I was part of the so called dust impact monitor. It was,
you can imagine it's a small cube like a Rubik's cube. And it was detecting dust particles or the
task was to detect past dust particles with something you know from your e guitars. Yeah,
so something called piezo crystals. Yeah, you're you're playing your guitar, the vibrations go
into some kind of crystal and the crystal is translating the vibration into an electric signal.
And we use the same principle here to convert impacts of dust particles on our instrument
to learn something about their properties like velocity, size, and shape, and so on.
And this was the paper you also saw just one second ago. And we were, our instrument was on
during the landing process, where we also, yeah, catch some data.
Yeah, amazing. And one of the pictures you got here in this video is of that's Rosetta, right?
The lander? Or no, this is Phileas, the thing that was sent down. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And it's
really high res picture, I guess, taken from Rosetta. And it's, you can see it on this rocky
cliff. It eventually found its way into this little crack where it's kind of, it's kind of
stuck there, right? But what science did you get out of it before it got stuck in that crack and
and lost its solar power?
- That's a good question.
So a lot of different instruments were involved, right?
So I can say for our instrument,
we had like this dust impact monitor
and during the descent phase, we had one impact.
So we detected exactly one particle.
It's not a lot, I know instrument was not big,
but at least we detected something
because we wanted to have main science work
on the core surface.
Now, since we landed in this cave or cavity
or what's not, we detect, we were not able to detect anything, right?
We were a lot of power was low.
So also other instruments were running there, like instruments to generate,
to create, get out some samples to, measure also a little bit, the gas
environment and so on to extract hopefully some organic, organic material and so
on.
So every instrument was running.
also a small hammer was hammering on the surface to see how hard is the surface and it was
really hard. So yeah, Fido was running for a few days, I think until the battery eventually
ran out and you see it was stuck in this shadow. So the battery was not able to recharge and
this was the end of the mission.
That's a little too bad that it got in the shadow, but still really cool. People might
not think there's going to be very much gas to detect. But like a lot of comets, it was
when it got close to the sun, it was shooting a bunch of gas out of it, right? So it didn't
have an atmosphere at four kilometers, but it did have gas coming off of it.
Yeah, exactly. You're perfectly right. So gas and dust and a lot of activity was going
on. So of course, as a human, you couldn't breathe this stuff, right? It's very, very
It's not the high density, but yeah, there was a lot of stuff going on and you can really
measure it and you can detect it.
And I think also Rosetta, if I'm not mistaken, was also sometimes hit by some dust particles
and you see them also in the camera system later.
So there is a lot of activity going on there on this tiny world.
And it's amazing to see that we were able to get there and measure it and see it in
real time.
This is really, really cool.
- That's really cool.
- It's really amazing.
Let me see if I can pull up your picture here at the end.
This perhaps.
Yeah, so if you go toward for this particular video,
if you go into the one thing I just want to give you credit
for, I do this with my YouTube videos as well,
not the podcast,
but the ones that are specifically made for YouTube.
It's putting chapters in,
it's really nice to have chapters like, okay,
this is the section that I, you know,
this two minute segment is really nice.
Like here's where you're computing this thing
or you're rendering that thing and it's nice.
So if you go over to the Rebounces task section,
you can see a really cool little animation
of you putting that together, drawing the line.
Maybe tell us about this.
This goes back to VisVis being pretty neat as well.
- Yeah, so this was the information.
So Phila was supposed to land on some area and stay there,
but eventually, unfortunately, it was rebouncing,
so for a few couple of times,
I don't know how many times, two, three times.
We can use now my video to check it.
And well, the data is quite precise.
So we have a very precise shape model
and we have a very precise reconstruction
of the trajectory of the lander.
So the path, I feel it was taking.
And yeah, and I was just taking
this totally different sources of data sources
and merging them together in VisWis,
yeah, using this PyQt framework that's under the hood.
And you see it fitted perfectly.
The trajectory really is on the surface,
you know, bouncing there.
And then you see at the end,
the bottom right now, so for all the listeners now,
there's like the end of the trajectory
in the small shadow hills.
- Or it got into that cavern, went to the cavern, yeah.
Went to rest, the big sleep.
- Exactly, yes.
- I guess what surprised me about this
is just how precisely this 3D model that was made
of the stereoscopic image data
and then the reconstruction of the lander in this 3D space,
like it lines up perfectly, like you said,
even as you rotate it in three dimensions,
you're like, I look at it from this angle,
it's like, wow, that really is pretty accurate.
- Yeah, absolutely.
I'm also always impressed how,
I mean, in the science community, and also in industry, right, everybody's playing a
small part, right?
But you play a part and at the end to see the end product, it's like, it's amazing,
right?
I mean, in science, it's like, it's like this, right?
It's like, wow, cool, we were able to generate the data.
I mean, I have the same feeling also in industry, right?
It's like, oh my god, look at the product at the end, you know, you're just you did
this very small part, but it's, it's your part of it.
And it's always nice to see how this mosaic puzzle is getting together at the end, right?
And providing useful insights.
It's pretty unbelievable.
Yeah, it really is.
All right, let's see.
What else I want to say about it?
I guess we're getting kind of short on time here.
Let's talk about this AI112, the autoencoder latent space visualization one.
So this is more close to your current work, right?
This ML work with space science, right?
- Yeah, yeah, I can explain a little bit here.
So what I used in this series
was so-called reflectance spectra of asteroids.
So imagine you have a flashlight
and you flash the asteroid,
you get a reflectance of the asteroid,
of course not a mirror or something,
you get something back. And based on the difference of your flashlight and what you get back,
you can derive conclusions about the chemical composition of the asteroid. So they are like
different spectra that encode different types. And I use the spectra and the spectra are
classified in certain classes, like some are let's say carbon rich, some are let's say
say, Stoney, or Iron Ridge.
And I was thinking, well, we can use autoencoders to check the latent space and see if we can
see these different classes into a low dimensional space.
So for all the viewers and listeners who don't know this autoencoder, it is like you have
your data and you make a regression model on your data itself.
Like, for example, a dog maps to a dog, a cat to a cat.
And in between in your neural network, you have like only a few attributes, only a few
numbers.
And these numbers, they are like an, like a, like a encoded representation of your information,
like the information of a cat or a dog.
The same thing you can do also with spectra of the asteroid.
And of course, I made a compression of let's say some spectra with 500 data points to two
dimensions.
This is severe information loss.
But I did it here, not for a science paper, but more for visualization representation.
And I was able then to see to show that these different classes that were that are human
made, they are also underlined by a data scientific approach, right, this autoencoder and this
autoencoder does not know what is an S class asteroid, what a C class, it simply sees that
the spectra. And then with the different clusters, you see, okay, there is like,
intrinsic different information in the spectra, right? So this is pretty cool. And to see,
you can improve autoencoders with variational autoencoder and so on. But this was the,
let's say, very first approach I wanted to show to anybody who's interested in this topic.
Maybe this opens the box just a little bit for people who want to go back and work with
some of that legacy data or historical data where people maybe tried to figure out these
things just handed off to grad students.
Say, "Yeah, how bright do you think this is?
Is it more like that or more like this?"
And then now you can apply these incredible machine learning models to it and maybe pull
out more nuanced details or find something new.
Yeah, exactly.
So for example, we have also the data from the Cassini spacecraft from the Saturn mission,
and we have like 100,000 of spectra there.
And I'm doing currently some, yeah, my freelance science job, some kind of classification task.
But at some point when we are finished with the project, I would like to make also this,
let's say, high, highly derived data also open available to anybody, right?
and show, "Hey guys, this are the spectra."
Use other methods to classify, to cluster the spectra
because there are tons of ideas
and I don't have all the time, right?
So I want others to be enabled to work
and continue on this heritage data
because it's not boring just because it's old.
- Yeah, yeah.
Now there's a lot of possibilities, I think,
to start applying those things.
- Yeah.
Thomas, I think we might be out of time
to go over any more of the videos.
You have many, many more.
I definitely want to encourage people
to go check out your channel and go through it
if they're really interested in actually diving
into some interesting,
but pretty approachable science topics.
You've got all the code there on GitHub.
You walk through it without taking too many shortcuts.
And oh, look, I changed it.
Now it totally looks great.
You have no idea what I did, right?
It's pretty much you can follow along well there.
So people should check that out.
Obviously, links in the show notes, right?
- Yeah.
Thank you very much, Michael, for inviting me
and to anybody.
If you have any questions or would like to know more stuff,
just approach me, just message me.
I'm always open for ideas and feedback
and I'm glad to help.
So just reach out to me.
- Yeah, absolutely.
But you don't get out here
before I ask you the final two questions.
If you're gonna write some code,
I think I know your answer from what you've said already,
but what editor are you using these days?
Well, I'm using for my daily job, VS Code, of course.
It's very nice. It's with remote containers.
It's a game changer. You can even develop Spark locally in a container,
which is like really amazing, right?
I have to say, though, and I say this is a perfect time now
to say goodbye to Atom.
Atom was a very nice editor. I used it also for years.
Now it's time to say goodbye to Atom.
And yeah, this is something I think we should address
here in the podcast now.
- Yeah, well, I feel like VS Code is a little bit
like the next, the successor to Atom, right?
Atom came from GitHub, Microsoft bought GitHub,
they released Visual Studio Code.
They're both in a similar style of an editor.
They're both, I think, electron apps.
It feels like, it's not so much as a goodbye
is like a here's the next generation.
- Yeah, exactly.
It's a very good successor.
So of course you're right.
It's a good times ahead, I think,
with more and more plugins.
- Yeah, cool.
I'm sure the VS Code people will send me a message
like that was not accurate enough,
but no, conceptually, I think there was a lot of motivation
that VS Code probably took from Adam.
All right, and then we've given a shout out
to a couple of libraries like VisVis.
What, what library or tool or whatever you come across there like, oh, this is really
cool.
I want to tell people about you know, what, what thing you want to give a shout out to?
I would like to give a shout out to AstroPy.
And there's also a very huge Python library that contains astronomy information, you can
extract data from the from astronomy databases, and so on, apply methods and so on.
It is like, let's say, it's not like spice, but let's say it's, it's also quite complex.
So you have to dive into this, right.
But they're also open for contributions and so on.
So if you are interested in joining astronomy, science data, try out Astro Pi and see if
you can improve it even because this is a huge community and everybody's grateful for
ideas and contributions.
So a very mighty library in the astronomy community.
Yeah, absolutely. All right, Thomas, thank you for being here. Final call to action people
are interested in this, you know, what do you tell them how to get started?
Well, yeah, just sounds like a cliche. Just be curious, right? But yeah, I mean,
astronomy is not only also about Python and so on. If you just if you want to approach
it differently start also with public outreach, with more public outreach related YouTube
channels also, also getting a telescope or something, really do hands on stuff.
It's also quite nice.
And no, don't sit all the time in front of your computer.
Just grab binoculars, just grab a camera and so on and do your own stuff.
There's a lot of things.
Remote telescopes are out there for a few bucks a night where
you can do your own images.
So yeah, it's not only about, it's just about Python.
I love Python, sure.
But also would like to tell you guys to approach astronomy from different angles.
also sometimes going out, observe meteors, count them with your hands,
and you can submit this to some organization,
and everybody's grateful for that.
Oh, excellent.
Well, we're all grateful for your YouTube work and putting that out there,
so thanks for all your contributions.
Thanks, Michael, for having me.
All right, bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]